CephX key rotation 1.18 cleanup (#16346)
rook/rook: Documentation/Storage-Configuration/Advanced/cephx-key-rotation.md

---
title: CephX Key Rotation
---

!!! attention
    This feature is experimental.

Rook is able to rotate [CephX authentication keys](https://docs.ceph.com/en/latest/dev/cephx/) used
by Ceph daemons and clients.

For this experimental feature, some caveats should be noted:

- Only Ceph versions v19.2.3 and higher have the capabilities Rook requires for key rotation.
- Ceph Monitor (mon) keys cannot be rotated in Ceph v19 due to Ceph architecture limitations.

> ## Overview

Reviewer: How about also pointing out that the key rotation is disabled by default?

Author: I updated the paragraph to this, which explains the default policy is `Disabled`. I hope that is still clear while also concise

> CephX keys can be rotated when desired on a one-off basis. To provide this capability, Rook utilizes
an approximation of Kubernetes's resource generation. A one-time key rotation is initiated by
specifying `KeyGeneration` as the desired policy (the default policy is `Disabled`) and also
specify a key generation higher than the current generation.

CephCluster `spec.cephVersion.image` is updated -- when daemons will normally need to restart.

### "Non-daemon" keys

Non-daemon keys may reasonably require user action beyond Rook API controls.

Because these keys affect non-daemon connections, Rook allows users to initiate rotation
independently during their desired maintenance window.

Below is a list of non-daemon keys along with the controlling config.

- CephCluster CSI keys are controlled via CephCluster `spec.security.cephx.csi`
    - Rotated CSI keys only take effect for new PVCs. For CSI alone, Rook is able to create new keys
        while also keeping a number of prior key generations active. This is configured using the
        `keepPriorKeyCountMax` option.
- The CephCluster RBD mirror peer key is controlled via CephCluster `spec.security.cephx.rbdMirrorPeer`
    - Each CephBlockPool that has mirroring configured will have a `peerToken` status that
        references the CephCluster RBD mirror peer key
- Each CephClient key is controlled via its own `spec.security.cephx`

## Initiating key rotation

To begin experimenting with key rotation, check out

> [CephX config](https://rook.io/docs/rook/v1.18/CRDs/specification/?h=cephx#ceph.rook.io/v1.CephxConfig)

Reviewer: In the release branches, the docs publish automatically uses the specific branch, so we can keep `latest` in master.
```suggestion
[CephX config](https://rook.io/docs/rook/latest/CRDs/specification/?h=cephx#ceph.rook.io/v1.CephxConfig)
```

options on Rook CRs.

### Example

Most key rotations are initiated from the CephCluster. An example spec that will rotate all CephX
keys for most new or upgraded Rook clusters is shown below.

```yaml
apiVersion: ceph.rook.io/v1
kind: CephCluster
metadata:
  name: my-cluster
  namespace: rook-ceph # namespace:cluster
spec:
  dataDirHostPath: /var/lib/rook
  cephVersion:
    image: quay.io/ceph/ceph:v19.2.3
  security:
    cephx:
      daemon:
        keyRotationPolicy: KeyGeneration
        keyGeneration: 2
      csi:
        keyRotationPolicy: KeyGeneration
        keyGeneration: 2
        keepPriorKeyCountMax: 1  # keep one prior key also
      rbdMirrorPeer:
        keyRotationPolicy: KeyGeneration
        keyGeneration: 2

>   mon:

Reviewer: How about just put a `...` and exclude the test settings `mon` and `storage`?

    count: 1
  storage:
    useAllNodes: true
    useAllDevices: true
```

Once rotation is complete, CephCluster status should look something like below. Each CephX key
type managed for the cluster is listed.

```yaml
status:
  # ...
  cephx:
    cephExporter:
      keyCephVersion: 19.2.3-0
      keyGeneration: 2
    crashCollector:
      keyCephVersion: 19.2.3-0
      keyGeneration: 2
    csi:
      keyCephVersion: 19.2.3-0
      keyGeneration: 2
      priorKeyCount: 1
    mgr:
      keyCephVersion: 19.2.3-0
      keyGeneration: 2
    mon: {}  # reminder: mon key rotation is unsupported currently
    osd:
      keyCephVersion: 19.2.3-0
      keyGeneration: 2
    rbdMirrorPeer:
      keyCephVersion: 19.2.3-0
      keyGeneration: 2
```

> Additionally, any CephFilesystem or CephObject store will show the status of rotation for their

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Additionally, any CephFilesystem or CephObjectStore will show the status of rotation for their
```
